---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# RCS Analysis Notes and Summary

## For Hayley's Dissertation Project on risky decision-making, temporal context and cognitive strategies

### Study at-a-glance

In this study, participants completed two rounds of a risky
decision-making task (after consent and substance use questionnaire).
Prior to each round of the task, participants were randomly assigned to
receive instructions to either act natural or to ignore context
(strategy) in a fully-crossed manner resulting in 4 groups:
natural-natural, natural-strategy, strategy-natural, and
strategy-strategy. Following each round of the decision-making task,
participants reported the difficulty, and frequency of following the
instructions (on a scale from 1-100 with 1 = easy or never and 100 =
most difficult or all the time). Participants were shown the outcome of
a randomly selected trial following each round of the task and then one
of the two outcomes were randomly selected for payment once both rounds
were complete.

After participants completed the risky decision-making task, they
completed two complex span tasks (the OSpan and SymSpan tasks), the
Emotion Regulation Questionnaire, and a demographic questionnaire.

### Basic participant information (inc. demographic info)

-   We collected data for a total of 134 participants. After exclusion
    criteria was applied, we have a total of 124 participants evenly
    distributed across the four groups (n=31/group).

-   Across the 124 participants and both rounds we have a total 32,414
    choices (after removing missed trials, more details below).

#### Exclusion across all tasks and missed trial information for RDM

-   RDM task: there are 5 predetermined exclusion criteria and
    participants needed to pass 4 or more to be included in all
    analyses. Participants were additionally excluded if they reported
    that their choices were influenced by other things outside of task
    parameters and/or made it clear that they did not understand the
    task (e.g. pressed both response buttons at the same time). Because
    the risky decision-making task is the task of interest, if
    participants were excluded from the RDM analysis, they were excluded
    from all analyses. Of the 134 participants:
    -   8 were excluded for failing criteria above
    -   2 were excluded for indicating that they did not understand task
        or that their choices reflected something other than values on
        the screen or other task parameters.

Across the 124 participants included in the analysis, there were a total
of 74 trials (median missed trial across both rounds = 0).

#### Demographic

-   Gender: 80 female, 40 male, 1 trans male, 2 gender nonconforming, 1
    other;

-   Age: mean(sd) age: 19.24(1.78) years, median age: 19 years, range:
    18-32 years\

-   Ethnicity: 15 hispanic or latino and 109 not hispanic or latino.

-   Race: white = 101; Black or African American = 2; American Indian
    and Alaskan Native = 1; Asian = 8; two or more races = 10; 2 decline
    to answer

-   Complex span tasks: Participants had to maintain 85% accuracy on the
    overall math and symmetry judgements to ensure that participants
    were not trading off recall accuracy with distractor accuracy.
    Individuals who did not maintain 85% on a given task, were only
    excluded from analyses involving that task (i.e. participants were
    not excluded across both complex span tasks if they only failed on
    one of the tasks). Of the 124 participants:

    -   14 participants were excluded from SymSpan for not passing
        symmetry scoring criteria
    -   9 participants were excluded from the OSpan for not passing
        symmetry scoring criteria
    -   2 additional participants were excluded from both for not
        completing the tasks
    -   16 total excluded from SymSpan; 11 total excluded from OSpan;
        including 4 participants who were excluded from both.
    -   we have at least one complex span data point for 120 people
        (97%)

-   Composite complex span scores: we combined the complex span scores
    by normalizing each individual score by the max (25 for ospan, 14
    for symspan) then took the average of the normalized scores.

### Basic RDM stats (inc. p(gamble), condition stats, post-round/task questions)

#### Probability of gambling by round

-   round 1: mean = 0.5338

-   round 2: mean = 0.5343 (paired t-test shows this is not a
    significant difference)

-   Suggests there is no strong effect of round on its own.

-   Probability of gambling across round/condition: When participants
    switch conditions, there is more risk-taking after being told to
    ignore context regardless of order. There is less risk-taking over
    time for those who do natural both rounds (consistent with previous
    research, e.g. PSH 2016) and there is more risk-taking over time for
    those who do strategy both rounds.

[pgamByRound_condition.pdf](https://github.com/sokolhessnerlab/rcs/files/10806209/pgamByRound_condition.pdf)

#### Instruction difficulty and frequency

*DIFFICULTY RATINGS:* - Overall, difficulty ratings ranged, on average
between 27-41 across groups. The difficulty patterns are
unusual/inconsistent suggesting that using such ratings or means of
these ratings is not the best method. When comparing natural vs.
strategy as a function of previous strategy (nat-nat vs nat-strat and
strat-nat vs strat-strat), all difficulty ratings following natural
instructions are higher (i.e. anything after natural is more difficult -
even nat-nat) and following strategy, the difficulty ratings are lower
(i.e. everything is easier following strategy). Comparing just the first
round nat vs. strat, there is no significant difference in difficulty
ratings (n=62 in each group). So in the "cleanest" analysis, we don't
see an effect between the difficulty ratings in the strategy so these
strategies are not differening fundamentally (This is the take away
which takes away from our potential confound). Likely can't use this as
a covariate. - nat-nat: Difficulty ratings increased across rounds
(round 1 mean = 27.48, range = 1-64.4; round 2 mean = 36.489, range =
1.76-79.6) - nat-strat: Difficulty ratings increased across rounds
(round 1 mean = 31.55, range = 1-77.64 ; round 2 mean = 41.78, range =
2.64-92.58) - strat-nat: Difficulty ratings were slightly lower across
rounds (round 1 mean = 1 -99.8; round 2 mean = 28.30, range = 1-76.17) -
strat-strat: Difficulty ratings were slightly lower across rounds (round
1 mean = 33.84, range = 1-87; round 2 mean = 30.15, range = 2.9-86.8)

*FREQUENCY RATINGS:* - Overall, participants reported following
instructions 70-80% of the time. When participants repeat conditions,
frequency ratings are similar. When participants switch conditions,
frequency ratings are higher for natural relative to strategy condition
but this difference is only significant when going from natural to
strategy. There was no significant difference between natural and
strategy frequency ratings for people who do natural and strategy first
(i.e .when just looking at round 1 data; n=62 each group). This lines up
with story from difficulty - these two conditions don't really vary in
terms of their subjective difficulty and how often they can implement
the strategy. - nat-nat: ratings roughly the same across rounds (means
\~73) - nat-strat: frequency rating less in strategy condition (nat,
round 1 mean = 76.87; strat, round 2 mean = 69.22, t-test p = .04) -
strat-nat: frequency rating less in strategy condition (strat, round 1
mean = 76.97; nat, round 2 mean = 78.4) - strat-strat: ratings less in
round 2 but difference is not significant (round 1 mean = 79.69; round 2
mean = 74.36)

    * this pattern seems more clear than difficulty ratings. When people repeat conditions, they follow those instructions roughly the same across the rounds but when people switch, they report following strategy instructions slightly less than natural instructions. 

*REACTION TIMES:* - We looked at reaction time in a few ways, using 1)
mean of mean, 2) mean of means with fast trials (\<1s) removed, 3) mean
of medians, and 4) mean of medians with fast trials (1s) removed.
Removing fast trials or RTs \<1s removed 7600 trials overall. Each of
the 124 participants had at least one of these trials and for some this
number of trials was in the 100s.

-   Overall (across the 4 types of analyses), participants were faster
    in round 2 relative to round 1 regardless of strategy/order. Looking
    in just round 1 data (nat vs strat, n=62), there were no significant
    differences in RT by instruction type.
-   This is also consistent with our takeaways above that the strategy and control conditions take similar resources to implement.
    
-   Practice effect at assessing the values. Could look at RT over the first round and will probably see general speeding across the first round that the kinda plateaus across the second round.
-   Look at .5ms as the fast trial - like this is a trial where people probably could not make the choice meaningfully in that time.
-   Removing these fast trials? - probably not because it could be contextual effects. 

#### Post-task questionnaire: Motivation and perceived RDM round indepedence

-   MOTIVATION: people were generally motivated during the experiment
    with mean ratings = 5.17 (range = 2-7 on a scale from 1-7). No big
    difference in motivation across conditions.

-   ROUND INDEPENDENCE (i.e. how independent did the rounds feel?): the
    rounds felt more independent than not (mean = 4.992; median = 5,
    range = 1-7 on a scale from 1-7). Slight difference in ratings of
    independence depending on condition, but the pattern is somewhat odd
    (e.g. its not systematically varying depending on whether people
    change instructions). 
    nat-nat mean = 4.48 
    nat-strat mean = 5.355
    strat-nat mean = 4.871 
    strat-strat mean = 5.258
    # visually showing ratings by condition - when people switch conditions, they tend to rate independence as higher. Lots of variability when repeating natural. Barely anyone rates low indepenence in strat-strat (makes sense given instructions to ignore previous stuff)

### Basic complex span tasks stats

OSPAN: range = 0-25; mean =14.53; median = 13 SYMSPAN: range = 0-14;
mean = 7.657; median = 9 
Ospan and symspan are correlated: r = .26, p =
.009 (TEST THE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT WITH FOSTER PAPER N=589 r=.53 with our CORRELATION HERE)
COMPOSITE: range = .06 - 1; median = .5743; mean = .57. Wide variation in composite scores - good for individuals variability.

# to what extent is the scoring on these complex span capturing capacity or motivation?
  - they are all achieving the same baseline level of math performance (85% or higher)
  - not a correlational relationship between motivation and composite span.
  - we cannot totally rid this possibility, but the data supports that the composite span is a measure of capacity over motivation.
  

### Basic ERQ stats

ERQ REAPPRAISAL: range = 14-42; mean = 29.69; median = 30 ERQ
SUPPRESSION: range = 4 - 27; mean = 14.89; median = 15

-   How does the complex span and ERQ compare to other studies?

### Individual-level measures: Are they related?

-   Instruction difficulty: using linear mixed effects model with
    instruction difficulty as outcome variable, there is no main effects
    of composite span score, erq or motivation. Trending effect of
    strategy (with strategy instructions being rated as more difficult).
    No interactions between strategy and the predictor variables.
-   Instruction frequency: using lienar mixed effects with instruction
    frequency as outcome variable, there is no main effects of composite
    span score, erq. But there is an effect of strategy (positive) and
    an interaction between strategy and motivation. This relationship is
    weird in natural condition when motivation is low, frequency ratings
    are lower and this effect is weakened when motivation is high. In
    the strategy condition, when motivation is low, the effect on
    frequency ratings is positive (higher frequency rating) but when
    motivation is high, the effect of frequency ratings is negative
    (lower frequency ratings).

## Temporal context effects!

### Generalized linear mixed effects modeling

#### Risky decision-making analysis

Trial-level model: Accounting for option values, magnitude, strategy and
round

People are more likely to choose an option as it gets bigger and gamble
less as values increase overall. Risk-taking increases in the strategy
relative to natural condition and this effect is strongest in round 2.

        Fixed effects:
                                    Estimate Std. Error z value Pr(>|z|)    
        (Intercept)                 -0.05629    0.10096  -0.558  0.57717    
        gainScaled                  12.59125    0.68694  18.330  < 2e-16 ***
        safeScaled                 -16.07157    1.34337 -11.964  < 2e-16 ***
        evLevScaled                 -8.23973    2.66697  -3.090  0.00200 ** 
        roundRecode                 -0.00704    0.01407  -0.500  0.61673    
        strategyRecode               0.09960    0.01990   5.006 5.56e-07 ***
        roundRecode:strategyRecode   0.05627    0.01951   2.885  0.00392 ** 
        AIC = 31127.6

\<FIGURE: pgamRoundxCondition.pdf\>

Do we see effects of past outcome, positive shift and earnings relative
to expectations?

Past outcome alone: trending, negative effect; no interaction with
strategy Shift: Need to account for both positive and negative shift.
Trending effect of positive shift and significant effect of negative
shift (more risk-taking with positive shift amount; less risk-taking
with negative shift amount) Earnings and expectations: Risk-taking
increases as earnings are more than expected, decreasese when earnings
are less than expected and when earnings are the same as expectations
the effect on gambling is very small, but positive. AIC is smaller when
including interaction between expectation and earnings (although
trending in model alone with no other timescales) Past outcome x
earnings/expectations: Best model accounts for an interaction between
past outcome and earnings and past outcome and expectations. Betas for
the interactions are opposite (consistent with what we see with just
expectations and earnings betas). When accounting for interaction with
past outcome, the main effects of earnings/expectations go away.

Does strategy interact with any of the timescales: The effect of
positive shift is stronger in the strategy condition (when told to
ignore context) The effects of past outcome does not change nor does the
global timescale (or interaction between immediate and global)

This is the exact opposite of predicted - but one thing does seem to be
confirmed which is that the immediate and global timescales appear
related/similar and if one changed, we'd expect the other to change.

# SHOW MODEL WITH ALL TIMESCALES AND PLOT THE RESULTS

#### Risky decision-making and complex span

#### Risky decision-making and ERQ

#### Risky decision-making and other variables (e.g. RT)

### Hierarchical Bayesian estimation

#### Summary of the model(and model variations) that we are using

1.  Basic prospect theory model with rho and mu
2.  Basic PT model with rho, mu and db
3.  Basic PT model with rho, mu and db + poc adjustment (model not
    great - adjusting analysis plan)
4.  Basic PT model with round and strategy on DB
5.  Basic PT model with round and strategy on both DB and rho (running
    now) \#### Results of each model (inc. time it took to run if that
    info is available at this point) \#### Which models will be ran next
